Add logfile input documentation for the Elastic Agent. (#22652)
elastic/beats: x-pack/elastic-agent/docs/inputs/input-logfile.asciidoc

> :type: logfile

Reviewer: Not sure this is required for the new docs (depends on how you plan to handle the includes). I'm trying to keep the files as simple as possible going forward.

Author: So you would just remove it?

> [id="{beatname_lc}-input-{type}"]

Reviewer: I'd hard code the ID.

Author: Like  this `elastic-agent-input-logfile` ?

=== Logfile input

++++
<titleabbrev>Logfile</titleabbrev>
++++

Use the `logfile` input to read lines from log files.

To configure this input, specify a list of glob-based <<input-paths,`paths`>>
that must be crawled to locate and fetch the log lines.

Example configuration:

["source","yaml",subs="attributes"]
----
inputs:
- type: logfile
  streams:
    - paths:
      - /var/log/message
      - /var/log/*.log
----

You can apply additional

> <<{beatname_lc}-input-{type}-options,configuration settings>> (such as `fields`,

Reviewer: I don't think we need to use {beatname_lc} here (since there's one agent now). Maybe just hard code as elastic-agent. Ditto to other instances here.

`include_lines`, `exclude_lines`, `multiline`, and so on) to the lines harvested
from these files. The options that you specify are applied to all the files
harvested by this input.

To apply different configuration settings to different files, you need to define
multiple stream or input sections:

["source","yaml",subs="attributes"]
----
inputs:
  - type: logfile

>     streams:

Reviewer 2: More general question: In standalone mode, should we encourage users to use multiple streams or multiple inputs? I'm thinking we should tell them to user multiple inputs as it is less hierarchy to configure.

It means, the `streams` concept does not even show up.

Author: This is indeed a good point, with that stream would be a fleet only concept, do we even need to document it?

Reviewer 2: I guess it will be used for the system metrics input and will be indirectly documented there. But we don't need it for logs.

     - paths:
       - /var/log/system.log
       - /var/log/wifi.log
     - paths: "/var/log/apache2/*"

>        fields:

Reviewer 2: Didn't we deprecated fields and `add_fields` should be used instead? @urso

Author: I believe we now recommend `add_fields` processor.

         apache: true
       fields_under_root: true
----

<1> Harvests lines from two files:  `system.log` and
`wifi.log`.
<2> Harvests lines from every file in the `apache2` directory, and uses the
`fields` configuration option to add a field called `apache` to the output.

IMPORTANT: Make sure a file is not defined more than once across all inputs or stream
because this can lead to unexpected behaviour.

[[file-identity]]
==== Reading files on network shares and cloud providers

:WARNING: {beatname_uc} does not support reading from network shares and cloud providers.

However, one of the limitations of these data sources can be mitigated
if you configure {beatname_uc} adequately.

By default, {beatname_uc} identifies files based on their inodes and
device IDs. However, on network shares and cloud providers these
values might change during the lifetime of the file. If this happens

> {beatname_uc} thinks that file is new and resends the whole content

Reviewer: I think this was my fault, but usually we don't anthropomorphize software components. :-) Maybe say: "If this happens, Elastic Agent processes the file as new and resends...." I don't have a strong feeling, just pointing out the general rule.

> of the file. To solve this problem you can configure `file_identity` option. Possible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the file. To solve this problem you can configure  the `file_identity` option. Possible
```

values besides the default `inode_deviceid` are `path` and `inode_marker`.

Selecting `path` instructs {beatname_uc} to identify files based on their

> paths. This is a quick way to avoid rereading files if inode and device ids

Reviewer: ```suggestion
paths. This is a quick way to avoid rereading files if inode and device IDs
```

Reviewer: Freud would be amused.

might change. However, keep in mind if the files are rotated (renamed), they
will be reread and resubmitted.

The option `inode_marker` can be used if the inodes stay the same even if

> the device id is changed. You should choose this method if your files are
> rotated instead of `path` if possible. You have to configure a marker file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the device ID is changed. If possible, you should choose this method
instead of `path` if your files are rotated. You have to configure a marker file
```

> readable by {beatname_uc} and set the path in the option `path` of `inode_marker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
readable by {beatname_uc}, and set the path in the option `path` of `inode_marker`.
```

Reviewer: usually you wouldn't add a comma between the noun and verb, but in this case, it makes the sentence easier to parse.

The content of this file must be unique to the device. You can put the
UUID of the device or mountpoint where the input is stored. The following

> example oneliner generates a hidden marker file for the selected mountpoint `/logs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example one-liner generates a hidden marker file for the selected mountpoint `/logs`:
```

> Please note that you should not use this option on Windows as file identifiers might be
> more volatile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that you should not use this option on Windows because file identifiers are
more volatile.
```

Reviewer: Did I get the meaning of this sentence right in my edit?

----
$ lsblk -o MOUNTPOINT,UUID | grep /logs | awk '{print $2}' >> /logs/.elastic-agent-marker
----

To set the generated file as a marker for `file_identity` you should configure
the input the following way:

["source","yaml",subs="attributes"]
----
inputs:
- type: logfile
  streams:
    - paths:
      - /logs/*.log
      file_identity.inode_marker.path: /logs/.elastic-agent-marker
----

[[rotating-logs]]
==== Reading from rotating logs

When dealing with file rotation, avoid harvesting symlinks. Instead
use the <<input-paths>> setting to point to the original file, and specify
a pattern that matches the file you want to harvest and all of its rotated
files. Also make sure your log rotation strategy prevents lost or duplicate
messages. For more information, see <<file-log-rotation>>.

Furthermore, to avoid duplicate of rotated log messages, do not use the
`path` method for `file_identity`. Or exclude the rotated files with `exclude_files`
option.

[id="{beatname_lc}-input-{type}-options"]
==== Configuration options

The `logfile` input supports the following configuration options plus the
<<{beatname_lc}-input-{type}-common-options>> described later.

> [float]

Reviewer: minor: in asciidoctor `[discrete]` is preferred over `[float]`. I don't know why because neither is very descriptive of what the thing does. :-)

Author: Well, I did just put what was existing, I will make the change for _discrete_ :)

subdirectories, the following pattern can be used: `/var/log/*/*.log`. This
fetches all `.log` files from the subfolders of `/var/log`. It does not
fetch log files from the `/var/log` folder itself.
It is possible to recursively fetch all files in all subdirectories of a directory
using the optional <<recursive_glob,`recursive_glob`>> settings.

{beatname_uc} starts a harvester for each file that it finds under the specified
paths. You can specify one path per line. Each line begins with a dash (-).

[float]
[[recursive_glob]]
===== `recursive_glob.enabled`

Enable expanding `**` into recursive glob patterns. With this feature enabled,
the rightmost `**` in each path is expanded into a fixed number of glob
patterns. For example: `/foo/**` expands to `/foo`, `/foo/*`, `/foo/*/*`, and so
on. If enabled it expands a single `**` into a 8-level deep `*` pattern.

This feature is enabled by default. Set `recursive_glob.enabled` to false to
disable it.

// Followup PR
//include::../inputs/input-common-harvester-options.asciidoc[]
//include::../inputs/input-common-file-options.asciidoc[]
//[id="{beatname_lc}-input-{type}-common-options"]

> // include::../inputs/input-common-options.asciidoc[]

Author: Followup PR.
